# Event Loop, Web APIs, (Micro/Macro)task Queue

The `Event Loop` plays a big role in the handling of asynchronous tasks! And this is important since JavaScript is single-threaded - we're only working with a single `Call Stack`.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/event-loop.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

---

### Call Stack

The `Call Stack` manages the execution of our program. When we invoke a function, a new execution context gets created which gets pushed onto the `Call Stack`. The top-most function in the call stack is evaluated, which could in turn invoke another function, and so on.

An execution context is popped off the `Call Stack` when the function completed its execution.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/call-stack.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

JavaScript is only able to handle one task at a time; if one task is taking too long to pop off, no other tasks can get handled.

This means that longer running tasks can block any other task from executing, essentially freezing our program!

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/call-stack-block.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

In this case, the `importantTask` had to wait until `longRunningTask` had been popped off the `Call Stack`, which took a while due to the expensive computation within its function body.

---

_But wait… To build an actual application, we often need some longer-running tasks. Things like network requests, timers, or just anything that's based on user input._

_Does this mean that our entire application freezes when we use such long-running tasks?_

```javascript
fetch("https://website.com/api/posts") 
// We don't know when the data gets returned from the server...
// Would this be on the call stack until the data returns?
```


Luckily, no! Such functionality isn't actually part of JavaScript itself; it's provided to us through `Web APIs`.

---

### Web APIs

`Web APIs` provide a set of interfaces to interact with features that the browser leverages. This includes functionality that we frequently use when building with JavaScript, such as the Document Object Model, `fetch`, `setTimeout`, and [many more](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API).

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/web-apis.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

The browser is a powerful platform that leverages tons of features. Some of them are required for us to build functional applications, such as the **Rendering Engine** to display content or the **Networking Stack** for network requests.

We even have access to some lower-level features, like the device's **sensors**, **cameras**, **geolocation**, and so on.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/rendering-network.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

`Web APIs` essentially act as a bridge between the JavaScript runtime and the browser features, allowing us to access information and use features beyond JavaScript's own capabilities.

---

_Okay cool, but what does this have to do with non-blocking tasks?_

Some `Web APIs` allow us to initiate async tasks, and offload longer-running tasks to the browser! 

Invoking a method exposed by such an API is really just to offload the longer-running task to the browser environment, and set up handlers to handle the eventual completion of this task.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/web-apis-browser.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

After initiating the async task (without waiting for the result), the execution context can quickly get popped off the `Call Stack`; it's non-blocking!

`Web APIs` that expose async capabilities either use a callback-based or promise-based approach.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/callbacks.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

First, let's talk about the callback approach.

---

### Callback-based APIs

Let’s take the [Geolocation API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Geolocation_API) as an example. On our website, we want to get access to the user’s location.

To get this, we can use the `getCurrentPosition` method which receives two callbacks: the `successCallback` that is used when we successfully received the user's location, and the optional `errorCallback` in case anything went wrong.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/geolocation.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

Invoking this function pushes its newly created execution context onto the `Call Stack`. This is really just to "register" its callbacks to the Web API, which then offloads the operation to the browser.

The function is then popped off the `Call Stack`; it's now the browser's responsibility.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/call-stack-geolocation.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

Behind the scenes, the browser prompts the user to give the website access to their location.

We don't actually know when the user will interact with our prompt, maybe they get distracted or they simply don't see the popup appear.

But that's no problem! As this is all happening in the background, the `Call Stack` remains available to take on and execute other tasks. Our website remains responsive and interactive.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/call-stack-no-block.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

Finally,  the user allowed our website to get access to their location. The API now receives the data from the browser, and uses the `successCallback` to handle the result.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/call-stack-geolocation-success.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>


However, the `successCallback` can't simply get pushed onto the `Call Stack`, as doing so could potentially disrupt an already running task, which would lead to unpredictable behavior and potential conflicts.

The JavaScript engine can handle tasks one at a time, which ensures a predictable and organized execution environment.

---

### Task Queue

Instead, the `successCallback` is added to the `Task Queue` (also called the `Callback Queue` for this exact reason). The `Task Queue` holds Web API callbacks and event handlers waiting to be executed at some point in the future.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/task-queue.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

_Okay so now the `successCallback` is on the task queue... But when does it get executed?_

---

### Event Loop

Finally, we get to the `Event Loop`! It's the responsibility of the `Event Loop` to continuously check if the `Call Stack` is empty.

Whenever the `Call Stack` is empty — meaning there are no currently running tasks — it takes the first available task from the `Task Queue` and moves this onto the `Call Stack`, where the callback gets executed.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/event-loop-call-stack.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

The `Event Loop` continuously checks if the call stack is empty, and if that's the case, checks for the first available task in the `Task Queue`, and moves this to the `Call Stack` for execution.

---

Another popular callback-based Web API is `setTimeout`. Whenever we call `setTimeout`, the function call is pushed onto the `Call Stack`, which is only responsible for initiating a timer with the specified delay. In the background, the browser keeps track of the timers.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/event-loop-settimeout.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

Once a timer expires, the timer's `callback` is enqueued on the `Task Queue`! It's important to remember that the delay specifies the time after which the callback is pushed to the `Task Queue`, not the `Call Stack`.

This means that the actual delay to execution might be longer than the specified delay passed to `setTimeout`! If the `Call Stack` is still busy handling other tasks, the callback would have to wait in the `Task Queue`.

---

So far, we've seen how callback-based APIs are handled.  However, most modern Web APIs use a **promise-based** approach, and, as you may have guessed, these are handled differently.

---

### Microtask Queue

Most (modern) `Web APIs` return a promise allow us to handle the returned data through chaining promise handlers (or by using `await`) instead of using callbacks.

```javascript
fetch("...")
  .then(res => ...)
  .catch(err => (...)
```

Since we're handling the data in a promise handler, we're using the `Microtask Queue`!

The `Microtask Queue` is another queue in the runtime with a higher priority than the `Task Queue`. This queue is specifically dedicated to:

- Promise handler callbacks (`then(callback)`, `catch(callback)`, and `finally(callback)`)
- Execution of `async` function bodies following `await`
- `MutationObserver` callbacks
- `queueMicrotask` callbacks 

When the `Call Stack` is empty, the `Event Loop` first processes all microtasks from the `Microtask Queue` before moving on to the `Task Queue`.


After completing a single task from the `Task Queue`, and the `Call Stack` is empty, the `Event Loop` effectively "starts over" by processing all microtasks in the `Microtask Queue` before again moving on to the next task.

This ensures that microtasks related to the just-completed task are handled immediately, maintaining the program's responsiveness and consistency.

> Microtasks can also schedule other microtasks! This could create a scenario where we create en infinite microtask loop, delaying the `Task Queue` indefinitely and freezing the rest of the program. So be careful!
>
> <video width="640" height="360" controls>
>   <source src="../assets/javascript-003/infinite-event-loop.mp4" type="video/mp4">
>   Your browser does not support video playback.
> </video>
>
> Such a scenario **cannot** happen on the `Task Queue`. The `Event Loop` processes tasks on the `Task Queue` one by one, then it "starts over" by checking the `Microtask Queue`.

---

A popular promise-based API is `fetch`. When we invoke `fetch`, its execution context is added to the `Call Stack`.

Calling `fetch` creates a **Promise Object** in memory, which is `"pending"` by default.  After initiating the network request, the `fetch` function call is popped off the `Call Stack`.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/call-stack-fetch.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

The engine now encounters the chained `then` handler, which creates a **PromiseReaction** record that's stored in  `PromiseFulfillReactions`.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/call-stack-then.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

Next, the `console.log` is pushed to the `Call Stack`, and logs `End of script` to the console. In this case, the network request is still pending.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/call-stack-end-script.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

When the server finally returns the data, the `[[PromiseStatus]]` is set to `"fulfilled"`, the `[[PromiseResult]]` is set to the `Response` object.  As the promise resolves, the **PromiseReaction** is pushed onto the `Microtask Queue`.

<video width="640" height="360" controls>
  <source src="../assets/javascript-003/call-stack-promise-fulfilled.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support video playback.
</video>

When the `Call Stack` is empty, the `Event Loop` moves the handler callback from the `Microtask Queue` onto the `Call Stack`, where it's executed, logs the `Response` object, and eventually popped off the call stack.

---

_Are all Web APIs handled asynchronously?_

No, just the ones that initiate asynchronous operations. Other methods, for example `document.getElementById()` or `localStorage.setItem()`, are handled synchronously.

---

### Recap

Let's recap what we covered so far:

- JavaScript is single-threaded, meaning it can only handle one task at a time.
- `Web APIs` are used to interact with features leveraged by the browser. Some of these APIs allow us to initiate async tasks in the background.
- The function call that initiates the async task is added to the `Call Stack`, but that is just to hand it off to the browser. The actual async task is handled in the background, and does not remain on the `Call Stack`.
- The `Task Queue` is used by callback-based `Web APIs` to enqueue the callbacks once the asynchronous task has completed.
- The `Microtask Queue` is used by Promise handlers, `async` function bodies following `await`, `MutationObserver` callbacks and `queueMicrotask` callbacks. This queue has priority over the `Task Queue`.
- When the `Call Stack` is empty, the `Event Loop` first moves tasks from the `Microtask Queue` until this queue is _completely empty_. Then, it moves on to the `Task Queue`, where it moves the first available task to the `Call Stack`. After handling the first available task, it "starts over" by again checking the `Microtask Queue`.

---

### Promisifying callback-based APIS

To enhance readability and manage the flow of async operations in callback-based Web APIs, we can wrap them in a Promise.

For example, we can wrap the Geolocation API's callback-based `getCurrentPosition` method in a `Promise` constructor.

```javascript
function getCurrentPosition() {
  return new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition(resolve, reject);
  });
}
```

This leverages the full power of promises, such as better readability and the use of `async/await` syntax.

````javascript
async function fetchAndLogCurrentPosition() {
  try {
    const position = await getCurrentPosition();
    console.log(position);
  } catch (error) {
    console.log(error);
  }
}

// function fetchAndLogCurrentPosition() {
//   getCurrentPosition()
//     .then((position) => console.log(position))
//     .catch((error) => console.error(error));
// }
````


We can even create a Promise-based timer using `setTimeout` to defer the execution of a code block until the timer has expired:

```javascript
function delay(ms) {
  return new Promise(resolve => setTimeout(resolve, ms))
}

async function doStuff() {
  // Perform tasks...
  await delay(5000);
  // Perform the rest after 5 seconds
}
```

---

### Conclusion

Understanding how the `Event Loop`, `Task Queue`, and `Microtask Queue` work together is important to master asynchronous, non-blocking JavaScript.

The `Event Loop` orchestrates the execution of tasks, prioritizing the `Microtask Queue` to ensure promises and related operations are resolved quickly before moving on to tasks in the `Task Queue`.

This dynamic enables JavaScript to handle complex asynchronous behavior in a single-threaded environment.
