# JavaScript Anti-Patterns

### What are the design patterns?

To understand what are the anti-patterns we need first to define what is a pattern. A pattern is usually a well known solution for a recurring problem.

These patterns are not algorithms or specific implementations. They are more like ideas, opinions, and abstractions that can be useful in certain situations to solve a particular kind of problem.

### What are the Anti-Patterns?

These anti-patterns are common mistakes that developers make while writing JavaScript code, and they can cause problems such as poor performance, security vulnerabilities, and maintenance issues.

### General Examples of Anti-Patterns

#### 1. Copy and Paste Programming

When a programmer is required to write two similar functions, the ‘easiest’ solution is to write one function, copy it, and make some changes to the copy. What problems does this bring? First, the code portability worsens - if you need similar functionality in another project, you'll have to look for all the places where the programmer has accumulated it and port them separately. Secondly, the quality of the code decreases - often the programmer forgets to make the necessary changes to the copied code. Thirdly, code maintenance becomes more complicated - if the original version had a bug that needs to be fixed in the future, this bug will be included in everything that the programmer has accumulated. This also leads to the emergence of various multiple fixes that will arise as the bug is found in different parts of the code, for one single bug. Fourthly, code review becomes much more complicated as the code becomes larger, without any visible significant benefit or increase in productivity. The main reasons for such mistakes are the lack of thought about the future of development (programmers do not think through their actions), lack of experience (programmers take ready-made examples and modify them to suit their needs). The solution is very simple: create common solutions and use them. We should think about this even when developing solutions to small problems - we may need to solve this problem somewhere else, or solve the same problem, but in a different interpretation.

#### 2. Spaghetti code

Spaghetti code is a poorly structured and poorly designed system, confusing and very difficult to understand. Such code also often contains many examples of anti-pattern copy-paste programming. Even its author will not be able to understand such code in the future. In OOP, spaghetti code can be represented as a small number of objects with huge methods, which are the same size as the code. The reasons for this are: development based on the principle of ‘Come on, it works! Five thousand lines!’, ineffective code reviews, lack of experience in OOP development, and remote work of individual programmers. It is impossible and undesirable to reuse spaghetti code. If spaghetti code starts to appear in your project, and you just need to expand the functionality it implements, don't be lazy, refactor the spaghetti completely or write this part again! Losing a little time now will give you a huge advantage in the future. Or vice versa, you will lose if you leave the spaghetti code in the project.

#### 3. Golden hammer

The golden hammer is confidence in the complete universality of any solution. In practice, this means applying one solution (most often a single design pattern) to all possible and impossible tasks. The problem is that many programmers ‘use’ this anti-pattern without realising their own incompetence - they think they know the design pattern and use it successfully, and everything is fine. The reason for this is that beginners are lazy to learn something new - a beginner tries to solve all problems using the only method they have mastered. Unfortunately, it also happens among professionals: a programmer likes to use a pattern and starts doing it everywhere. You have to fight against this - there are not just one, but several beautiful and optimal solutions for each task - and effective development is all about finding such solutions. And only such development will create an effective system.

#### 4. Magic numbers

A magic number is a constant used in the code for something (most often data identification), the number itself does not make any sense without an appropriate comment. Numbers carry absolutely no semantics. When numbers start appearing in your project's code that don't have an obvious meaning, it's a very bad thing. A programmer who is not the author of such code will have a hard time explaining how it works. Subsequently, the author of the code, with the presence of magic numbers, will not be able to explain anything. Numbers make it difficult to understand the code and refactor it. The main reasons for this mistake are haste during development and lack of programming practice. This anti-pattern must be stopped at the root by stipulating the use of numerical constants before the start of development.

#### 5. Hard code

Hard coding is the introduction of various data about the environment into the implementation. For example, different file paths, process names, device names, etc. This anti-pattern is closely related to magic numbers, and they are often intertwined. Hardcoding is the process of rigidly defining the meaning of any data in the code. The main danger that comes from this anti-pattern is intolerance. On the developer's system, the code will work properly until files are moved or renamed, or the device configuration is changed. On any other system, the code may not work at all right away. As a rule, a programmer almost immediately forgets where and what he or she has corrupted, even if he or she does it to debug the code. This makes detecting and localising this anti-pattern very difficult. You need to fight this by stipulating a ban on hard coding before starting development and conducting thorough code reviews.

#### 6. Soft code

Soft coding is a paranoid fear of hard coding. This leads to the fact that absolutely everything is unhardened and customisable, making the configuration incredibly complex and opaque. This anti-pattern is the other end of the hard-coding stick and is therefore also dangerous. Firstly, during development, a lot of resources are spent on implementing the ability to configure absolutely everything. Secondly, deploying such a system will also entail additional costs. Before you start solving a particular problem, you should determine what should be customisable and what is constant across systems or can be configured automatically.

#### 7. Accidental complexity

In simple terms, it is the lack of clarity of the solution. Unnecessary complexity can be introduced into the solution of any task. It can be unnecessary checks, parts of the code produced by soft coding, or the absence of any optimisation. This leads to a difficulty in understanding the code and a decrease in the speed of work. The reasons for this are the lack or poor quality of refactoring, and the incompetence of the programmer. The solution is quite simple - you should conduct thorough code reviews and effective refactoring.

#### 8. Boat anchor

This anti-pattern means keeping unused parts of the system that are left after optimisation or refactoring. Often, after refactoring a code that results from an anti-pattern, some parts of the code remain in the system even though they are no longer used. Similarly, some parts of the code may be left ‘for the future’, in case you need to use them again. Such code only makes systems more complex, with absolutely no practical value. An effective method of dealing with boat anchors is to refactor the code to eliminate them, as well as the development planning process to prevent the occurrence of anchors.

#### 9. Reinventing the wheel

The point of this anti-pattern is that a programmer develops his own solution to a problem for which solutions already exist, often better than the one invented by the programmer. The developer thinks he is the best, so he tries to come up with his own solution for each task, regardless of the experience of his predecessors. Most often, this only leads to a waste of time and a decrease in the efficiency of the programmer's work, as a solution may be found that is far from optimal or not found at all. The possibility of solving the problem on your own should not be completely rejected, as this will directly lead to copycat programming. The developer should be aware of the tasks that may arise in order to solve them competently - using ready-made solutions or inventing their own. Very often, the reason for this anti-pattern is a banal lack of time. And time is money.

#### 10. Reinventing the square wheel

This anti-pattern is very closely related to the simple invention of the bicycle - it is the creation of a bad solution when a better one exists. This anti-pattern is doubly time-consuming - because, firstly, time is spent on inventing and implementing your own solution, and secondly, time is spent on refactoring such solutions and replacing them with optimal ones. A programmer should be aware of the existence of different solutions for certain circles of tasks, and be aware of their advantages and disadvantages.

#### 11. Lava flow

At some stage of development, you may realise that some part of the code hasn't been changed for a long time and is undocumented at all, or such code is accompanied by a comment like ‘// I don't know how it works, but it works. Do not delete or change it!’. If you do nothing, such code will remain in the project. But it's also quite difficult to refactor it, to parse it, especially if its author is no longer working on the project. It's easier to foresee the emergence of such dead code, and during development, you should be guided by the fact that the code may be slightly optimised or modified in the future, but not completely rewritten. The main causes of lava flows are writing large parts of the project by one programmer, lack of code review, and errors in architecture design.

#### 12. Programming by permutation

Many novice programmers try to solve some problems by brute-force - not by brute-force solutions, but by selecting parameters, the order of function calls, etc. All these games with +1, -1 to parameters and similar things only eliminate the symptoms, and do not give an understanding of the essence of what is happening. And if a programmer doesn't understand what's going on, he won't be able to foresee all the options and will definitely forget something. He will spend time selecting a solution that works for him, and later spend time reworking this solution. All such selected solutions go sideways, and it's a good thing if they do so during development or debugging. This is not something you should get used to when succeeding in small tasks. If a programmer can't solve problems in a different way, he is incompetent and shouldn't be trusted with development, and you will be worse off.

#### 13. Blind faith

This anti-pattern is an insufficient check of the correctness of input data, error correction, or code output. Very often, a programmer thinks that his code will always be in perfect conditions, will never generate errors and will never receive incorrect input data or, what's more, data of the wrong type. But everyone lies, so you can't trust any code, even your own. But you shouldn't take this distrust to the point of paranoia, i.e., to an anti-pattern of unnecessary complexity. You just need to remember to check the input data and possible problems in someone else's code that you use.

#### 14. Thoughtless commenting

The result of this anti-pattern is a large number of unnecessary and uninformative comments. Code should not be commented for the sake of commenting! After all, comments are a very useful tool that should help document the necessary information to make the code easier to understand, both for the author in the future and for other developers. In no case should you allow developer dialogue in comments - it is better to move this function from comments to specialised code review tools or to a personal discussion.

#### 15. God Object

‘I need such and such functionality. - Use MegaCoreObject!’ - ’And also, I need... - I said, use MegaCoreObject!’

A divine object is an anti-pattern that is quite common in OOP development. Such an object takes on too many functions and/or stores almost all the data in itself. As a result, we have an unbearable code that is also difficult to understand. Similarly, such code is quite difficult to maintain, given that the entire system depends almost exclusively on it. The reasons for this are the incompetence of the developer, and the fact that one developer takes on a large part of the work (especially when the size of the work ‘exceeds’ the level of experience of this developer). The way to combat this approach is to split the task into subtasks, with the possibility of solving these subtasks by different developers.

#### 16. Deep nesting

When code is deeply nested, it means that multiple levels of conditional statements or loops are nested within each other. This can make the code harder to read and understand, especially if the nesting is complex and involves many conditions or loops.

Deep nesting can also make the code longer because each nested block adds more lines of code to the overall program. This can make the code harder to maintain and modify, because changes made to one part of the code may require changes to other nested blocks as well.

To avoid deep nesting, developers can use a few strategies:

1. Refactor the code: If the code is deeply nested, it may be possible to refactor it into smaller, more manageable blocks. This can make the code easier to understand and modify.
2. Use early returns or breaks: If possible, use early returns or breaks to exit a nested block early. This can reduce the level of nesting and make the code easier to read.
3. Use guard clauses: Instead of nesting multiple conditions, use guard clauses to check for error conditions or special cases at the beginning of a function or method. This can reduce the level of nesting and make the code easier to read.

#### 17. Ignoring error handling

This anti-pattern can lead to unexpected behavior, crashes, and security vulnerabilities in the application. For example, failing to properly handle errors may cause the application to display incorrect information, behave unpredictably, or even crash altogether. Additionally, ignoring errors can make it easier for attackers to exploit vulnerabilities in the application, such as by injecting malicious code or stealing sensitive data.

### JavaScript Examples of Anti-Patterns

#### 1. Improper use of Truthy and Falsy values

In JavaScript, Falsy and Truthy values are a bit different than other tools, and by Falsy that means equal to false, and Truthy means when we check it is equal to true, we have about 5 different values which are Falsy in JavaScript which might be wise if you check for each one in the proper way instead of checking in general if they are falsy, check below for best practices.

**Bad**

```javascript
function isTruthy(y) {
  return !y ? false : true
}

let x
isTruthy(x) // false

x = 0
isTruthy(x) // false

x = ""
isTruthy(x) // false

x = null
isTruthy(x) // false

x = NaN
isTruthy(x) // false
```

**Good**

_A comment in front of each value tells you how to check that value._

```javascript
function isTruthy(y) {
  return !y ? false : true
}

let x
isTruthy(x) // This is okay to check undefined

x = 0
isTruthy(x) // check -> x !== 0 || x > 0

x = ""
isTruthy(x) // check -> x !== '' || x?.length > 0

x = null
isTruthy(x) // check -> x ?? true : false

x = NaN
isTruthy(x) // check -> isNaN(x)
```

#### 2. Modify DOM in loop

Modifying the **DOM** (Document Object Model) is an expensive operation because it involves recalculating the layout and rendering of the page. When elements are added or modified in a loop, this process must be repeated multiple times, which can significantly impact performance and slow down the user experience.

In fact, modifying the **DOM** in a loop is often considered the worst case scenario, because it can cause the browser to constantly recalculate the layout and repaint the page, leading to significant performance issues and janky animations.

Instead of modifying the **DOM** directly in a loop, you can use a DocumentFragment to make modifications to the **DOM** in memory before appending it to the page.

A **DocumentFragment** is a lightweight, in-memory container that can hold a group of **DOM** elements. When elements are added to a **DocumentFragment**, they are not rendered to the page, which avoids the performance overhead of recalculating the layout and repainting the page after each modification. Instead, the modifications are applied to the DocumentFragment in memory, and the entire fragment is then appended to the page in one operation, causing only a single reflow and repaint of the page.

Using a **DocumentFragment** can significantly improve the performance of **DOM** modifications, especially when dealing with large amounts of data or complex page layouts. By making modifications in memory and appending them to the page all at once, you can avoid the performance overhead of recalculating the layout and repainting the page multiple times, resulting in a smoother and more responsive user experience.

**Bad**

```javascript

// Create 10 elements and push them to document
for (let i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
  const div = document.createElement("div")
  div.textContent = i

  // Every loop iteration a new element is created
  // and get added to document node what causes
  // re-paint and re-flow
  document.appendChild(div)
}
```

**Good**

```javascript
// DocumentFragment are saved in memory
// push elements all at once into the document node
const fragment = new DocumentFragment()

for (let i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
  const div = document.createElement("div")
  div.textContent = i

  fragment.appendChild(div)
}

document.appendChild(fragment)
```

#### 3. New Object in `Array.prototype.reduce`

The problem here is to try to create a new Object in each round in reduce function, trying to make it immutable however if is creating already a new Object/Array in each route so mutating it is fine otherwise you will end up creating extra Objects in memory.

**Bad**

```javascript
const users = [
  { name: "Medhat", admin: true },
  { name: "Adam", admin: false },
  { name: "Karma", admin: true },
]

// Spread operator is creating a new Object
users.reduce(
  (acc, item) => ({
    ...acc,
    [item.name]: item.admin,
  }), {})

/*
 Expected Output
 {
   Medhat: true, Adam: false, Karma: true
 }
*/
```

**Good**

```javascript
const users = [
  { name: "Medhat", admin: true },
  { name: "Adam", admin: false },
  { name: "Karma", admin: true },
]

users.reduce((acc, item) => {
  acc[item.name] = item.admin
  return acc
}, {})

/*
 Expected Output
 {
   Medhat: true, Adam: false, Karma: true
 }
*/
```

#### 4. Manipulate arguments

The thing is that non-primitive data types are passing by reference not by value, which means when you make an object `let obj = { name: 'Medhat' };` and create another variable to copy that object like `let obj2 = obj` actually `obj2` in pointing at the same object in memory and if you make a change like `obj2.name = 'Adam'` also `obj` will have `"Adam"` as a name.

In javaScript you can access all arguments or a function through an object named `arguments`, given what we understand above, mutating the arguments object will make a mess, check the example below to understand what I mean:

**Bad**

```javascript
var makePerson = function(color, name, age) {
  if (arguments.length < 3) {
    color = "green"
    name = arguments[0]
    age = arguments[1]
  }

  return {
    name: name,
    age: age,
    color: color,
  }
}

var person = makePerson("Medhat", 18)
console.log(JSON.stringify(person)) // => {"name":"green","age":"green","color":"green"}
```

I'd advice not to ever mutate the `arguments` object, if you want to achieve the above result without a problem you might deep-copy the object using `let argCopy = Object.assign({}, arguments);` or by sending the color argument to as a last argument and make it optional.

### Conclusions.

Anti-patterns are the main enemies of the developer, and programmers often fall under their influence due to pressure from the customer or project manager. A banal lack of time and haste now can easily result in huge problems and system inoperability in the future. You should remember a few simple principles: ‘If you go slowly, you will go further’ and ‘If you don't grease, you won't go’. Anti-patterns should not only be known, but you should know their causes and methods of dealing with them, and even better - warn yourself in advance against their ‘use’. A programmer should not write code in such a way that it will have to be refactored later, remember that!
